So, let's talk about the importance of relational databases.
So, a little bit of history here.
The concept of relational databases was invented in about 1969 by researchers at IBM.
Edgar R. Codd was the lead researcher.
He proposed 12 rules of what makes
the database management system a true relational system.
We won't go over each rule,
but I want to focus here on rule one because it's particularly important for this course.
Rule one, the information rule.
All information in a relational database is represented explicitly at
the logical level in exactly one way by values and tables.
Rule one, is what we're trying to achieve with data modeling.
Remember, this is all abstract concepts of
relational modeling and what makes a system a valid relational model.
So, why is the relational model important?
Standardization of the data model.
It takes work and effort to get your data transformed into the rows and columns format.
But once you do this, your data is in
standardized and we'll be able to be query with SQL.
Number two, flexibility in adding and altering tables.
Relational database gives you the flexibility to add tables,
alter tables, and add or remove data.
Remember, these are the basics of what makes a database also a relational model.
Data integrity. Data integrity is the backbone of using relational model.
You'll remember from lesson one,
we talked about this quite extensively.
Strong data typing ensures data that does
not fit the model will not be inserted causing corruption.
Number four, Standard Query Language.
Standard language can be used to access the data with a predefined language.
Simplicity. Then finally, intuitive organization.
The most important benefit for us to remember,
is that data is systematically stored and modeled,
and that the modeling process is an intuitive process.
If you've created a spreadsheet in Excel,
you have created tables and modeled your data.
It was so natural,
you didn't even think that you were doing data modeling but you really were.
More complicated systems require more intense thought and experimentation,
but the basics are really the same.